More Rust
=========

:tags: programming, rust, C++
:language: en
:summary: More about the programming language rust

After `getting in touch with rust
<http://rnestler.github.io/learning-rust.html>`_, the next thing I was looking
at where pointers and the concept of ownership and borrowing in rust.

Pointers
--------

Rust has a lot of different pointer types, reminding me the C++ references, raw
pointers and smart pointers like `std::unique_ptr
<http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr>`_, `std::shared_ptr
<http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/shared_ptr>`_.  For a nice comparison
see `here <https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/wiki/Rust-for-CXX-programmers>`_

One of the first pointer type you will meet in rust is the reference type.

.. sourcecode:: rust

    fn main() {
        let mut x=1;
        println!("x = {}", x);
        add_one(&mut x);
        println!("x = {}", x);
    }

    fn add_one(num: &mut i32) {
        * num += 1;
    }

In C++ this would look something like this:

.. sourcecode:: cpp

    #include <cstdio>

    void add_one(int& num) {
        num += 1;
    }

    int main() {
        int x=1;
        printf("x = %i\n", x);
        add_one(x);
        printf("x = %i\n", x);
    }

What is think is nice in rust is:

 * It's explicit that x will be modified (``&mut x``)
 * It's guaranteed that x is neither dangling nor 0

In C++ references have value syntax. To avoid that I prefer the style of using
pointers for mutable and only const reference for immutable data.

.. sourcecode:: cpp

    #include <cstdio>

    void add_one(int* num) {
        *num += 1;
    }

    int main() {
        int x=1;
        printf("x = %i\n", x);
        add_one(&x);
        printf("x = %i\n", x);
    }

That way the syntax looks much more like the rust example, but you can pass 0:

.. sourcecode:: cpp
    
	add_one(0);
    -> Segmentation fault (core dumped)

Trying the same with C++ references yields a compile error, because a non const
reference can't bind to a temporary (rvalue)

.. code-block:: none

    reference.cpp: In function 'int main()':
    reference.cpp:12:11: error: invalid initialization of non-const reference of type 'int&' from an rvalue of type 'int'
      add_one(0);
               ^
    reference.cpp:3:6: note: in passing argument 1 of 'void add_one(int&)'
     void add_one(int& num) {
          ^

Surprising to me, doing the same within rust works

.. sourcecode:: rust

    fn main() {
        add_one(&mut 0);
    }

    fn add_one(num: &mut i32) {
        print!("adding one to {}", num);
        * num += 1;
        println!(" -> {}", num);
    }

Output: ``adding one to 0 -> 1``.  Apparently one can bind mutable references
to temporaries in rust.

Heap pointers
-------------

For managing data on the heap rust has the ``Box<T>`` type

.. sourcecode:: rust

    fn main() {
        let x = Box::new(5);
        println!("{}", * x);
    }

Output: ``5``

The equivalent in C++ would be

.. sourcecode:: cpp

    #include <memory>
    #include <cstdio>

    int main() {
        auto x = std::make_unique<int>(5);
        printf("%i\n", *x);
    }

Note that the compiler takes care of freeing the used resources as soon as x
goes out of scope. In the C++ world this is called `RAII
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Acquisition_Is_Initialization>`_



Ownership, Borrowing and Livetime
=================================

The Box type is an owning type. Meaning that it owns the resources it is
pointing to. The same is true for ``std::unique_ptr``

When passing a Box type to a function the ownership transfers to this function

.. sourcecode:: rust

    fn add_one(mut num: Box<i32> ) {
        * num += 1;
    }

    fn main() {
        let x = Box::new(5);
        println!("{}", * x);
        add_one(x);
        println!("{}", * x);
    }

This will result in a compile error

.. sourcecode:: none

    boxed.rs:10:20: 10:22 error: use of moved value: `*x`
    boxed.rs:10     println!("{}", * x);
                                   ^~
    note: in expansion of format_args!
    <std macros>:2:43: 2:76 note: expansion site
    <std macros>:1:1: 2:78 note: in expansion of println!
    boxed.rs:10:5: 10:24 note: expansion site
    boxed.rs:9:13: 9:14 note: `x` moved here because it has type `Box<i32>`, which is non-copyable
    boxed.rs:9     add_one(x);

Because a Box owns the resource, x will get invalid.
If we try same in C++

.. sourcecode:: cpp

    #include <memory>
    #include <cstdio>

    void add_one(std::unique_ptr<int> num) {
        *num += 1;
    }

    int main() {
        std::unique_ptr<int> x = std::make_unique<int>(5);
        printf("%i\n", *x);
        add_one(std::move(x));
        printf("%i\n", *x);
    }

It will result in a segmentation fault:

.. sourcecode:: none

    % g++ -Wall -std=c++14 cpp_smart_pointers.cpp  -o cpp_smart_pointers
    % ./cpp_smart_pointers 
    5
    [1]    28585 segmentation fault (core dumped)  ./cpp_smart_pointers

Because the unique_pointer moved from x into the function argument x remains
invalid and dereferncing it will leave it invalid.  Note that ``g++`` doesn't
even issue a warning when compiling this code with ``-Wall``.

What I think is nice in the C++ version is the explicit ``std::move`` which
makes it obvious to the reader, that x shouldn't be used afterwards.

The compile errors rust gives can be intimidating when learning rust, since it
is not obvious from the code that x just moved.

But rust's livetime concept doesn't stop here.  It even tracks down usage of
invalidated references.
Consider the following C++ code

